this episode is supported by monster
joysticks calm level up your Raspberry
Pi with our all-in-one arcade kit using
genuine San where arcade parts and one
click print comm for your photos on
canvas acrylic gifts and more local
craftsman and global delivery
hello cave dwellers can you believe the
PlayStation is 25 years old it's crazy I
know it hits our European Shores in 1995
a little earlier elsewhere and it
quickly shook off the competition from
Sega to become the coolest console on
the block
well now it's starting to I up
comfortable shoes and cardigans and I
refuse to let it grow old gracefully
which is why we're slipping inside it
today
thus I hope not the PSI oh because the I
in the name is a Roman numeral for a 1
not confusing at all I know and it comes
from the wonderfully named Cyberdyne
systems which will sound familiar to any
terminator found this isn't Skynet for
your PlayStation though it's an FPGA
based flashcard onto which you can store
up to 1000 PlayStation CD images and
launch them without the need for CDs or
a reliance on its aging cd-rom mechanism
it promises all the convenience of the
PlayStation Classic but unlike that
system or indeed subsequent Playstations
that offer backwards compatibility it's
not emulating anything outside of the
cd-rom interface you're banging on the
original hardware for the most authentic
experience possible this you're going to
want to see but first we need to install
it and that requires the use of our
soldering iron so let's talk more as we
take it over to the lab and get it
fitted
[Music]
here then is our trusty PlayStation and
yes I'm aware it's got a layer of Filth
on it and I'll give it a clean later
I owned a ps2 back in the day and not a
ps1 I was a PC gamer at the time but I
will confess I did rent the system many
times from the local video store to play
point blank and Gran Turismo the CEO
comes in a wonderfully official-looking
box it could easily have been a Sony
product from back in the day and it's
been around for some time now
first conceived in 2010 a prototype
appeared in 2012 and it has matured and
developed ever since into the product it
is today in the box we get some wire a
switch PCB and the cartridge itself
which plugs into the parallel port of
the PlayStation not all systems have
this port as it wasn't really used much
so it was dropped from the design of
later models the switch board detects if
this i/o is inserted or not if it is it
uses it if not it boots as if it's a
normal PlayStation but either way the CD
drive is still operable it doesn't
render the CD drive useless but what the
switch board is not is a mod chip it
won't let you boot copied CDs sometimes
say they could enable how to do that but
they don't feel legal reasons which is
understandable and this is where
soldiering comes in we'll need to cut
some traces and solder some wires to the
switch board to make the CEO work now
there are 21 versions of the ps1 which
are compatible with this i/o and I'll
include a link in the description so you
can check yours and of course they all
have the parallel port on the back so if
you don't have that then it's game over
for you at this point because there are
so many variants and an installation
guide for each system board my
installation may vary from yours but the
techniques are the same and the official
installation guides are very detailed so
you'll know exactly what goes where my
particular Play Station appears to have
a security sticker on it from the local
police in decent helens area near
Liverpool I didn't steal it officer I
promise now let's crack this open
[Music]
the ps1 is relatively simple to work on
this is the power supply unit here on
the left and as always please take
proper precautions to make sure it's
discharged and it's not going to bite
you the remainder of the system
comprises of shielding and the chassis
which will get out of the way there's
also the front ports for the memory
cards and the controllers the cd-rom
assembly and then the system board
itself all of the ribbon cables just
pull out save for the cd-rom data cable
here you need to pop the lock on the
port first so don't force that one out
[Music]
and then the whole cd-rom assembly lifts
off it's surprisingly easy to replace or
remove for maintenance if you have CD
problems mine works but I will put some
fresh grease on it later to keep things
running smoothly we can then access the
system board and with just a couple more
screws it lifts out and I'll also
disassemble the remainder of the system
for cleaning later and free this dead
ant who met a shocking end in the PSU
and what a way to go fully disassembled
that's our PlayStation and that's not so
scary as it is certainly not a pioneer
laser active in its complexity but I did
find a surprise inside my system on the
reverse of the system board is a modchip
a very common one in fact which would
have allowed the use of copied CDs but
it's if it installed here with blue tank
and tape just look at it I mean it works
and it probably has worked for 20 years
so I shouldn't really be too much of a
snob when it comes to this kind of
backstreet engineering but I think I
will take it out of my system and then
give the board a good clean up with some
IPA before we proceed the CEO will work
quite happily with mod chips in place
you don't necessarily have to take them
out but I'm unlikely to actually need to
use copied CDs anymore I'll use this i/o
for that purpose so
I'll just get it out the way as well as
the blue tank
[Music]
here on the screen then is the
installation manual for my particular
board which is a pu 8 board and like I
said yours may be very different but the
techniques involved in cutting traces
are the same I do that here with a
scalpel being very careful not to follow
through and cut other traces I'm cutting
towards a component leg here which is
acting as a kind of buffer should I slip
rather than than cutting straight across
all the other traces and once you're
happy with your cut you want to use a
multimeter in continuity mode to check
that the trace has actually been cut and
there's no longer continuity there we'll
also need to solder wire onto existing
traces at the wires to prep the area for
soldiering I like to gently scrape the
solder mask away with the scalpel and
then if it needs more attention with a
glass fiber pencil to expose the copper
and give us something to solder to now
my eyes are still pretty good but this
is the limit really of what I can work
out without magnification so you might
want to consider a basic magnifier to
help you with this job with the
requisite traces cut an area is prepared
for soldering we can then stick the
switch board on using the self-adhesive
tape on the back of it no blue tack
required and then we just need to run
the wires as instructed to strip the
ends of the wire sometimes I use wire
cutters but I also use the iron to strip
the plastic off of the wire which also
serves to tin the wire in the process
but if you do that just make sure you
keep the tip nice and clean if you've
been burning plastic away with it
I wanted hearing the wires it's always a
good idea to dab some liquid flux onto
your solder point to make sure it
behaves if impurities have worked their
way into the existing solder and also
get some fresh solder on your iron to
help conduct the heat and also get a
good strong bond with the wire itself as
you dab it on there on the switchboard
itself I've just put a bead of solder on
each pad ready to slip the cable
straight into it with a touch of heat
[Music]
and tweezers are another useful tool for
such a fiddly job to help you work
accurately if you've had too much coffee
beforehand like me all the tools and
equipment you might need are included in
the video description where you'll find
an Amazon shop I curate and even if you
don't buy from there it might give you
some ideas for tools so do check it out
[Music]
and then we simply rinse and repeat
eventually come into the blue wire here
which is tapping into the power for the
switch PCB and then another for the
ground and with that we're ready to test
it out and you'll have notice there that
I tidied it all up with some captain
tape now on my SD card here this is a 64
gig card I've copied a file name to menu
dosis which you can access from the side
down website using your serial number
and order number to get into their
secure download area so I suggest you
download them and keep them safe just in
case anything should ever happen to that
website and then I've copied some CD
images onto the card the device supports
both multi CD games and games that use
Redbook audio but will look at all of
that shortly I just want to do some
basic testing first to see if it works
now the CEO goes into the back in the
parallel port as you know there is a
little bit of wobble actually when you
put it in there so maybe there's a use
for a blue tank after all to hold it
into place because the SD card is hot
swappable and you don't want it wobbling
make sure we put it in the right way
around as and when you pop the SD card
in and out but there's really a very
little reason to take this i/o out once
it's in there so so long as your SD card
is fully loaded and all set up it should
all remain in place pretty much all the
time until you come to use those multi
CD games because to notify the device
you want to swap the CD you just pop the
SD card out and back in again like that
and it will move on to the next CD so
yeah a little bit of security there to
stop the wobble might help but that
aside let's connect it all up let's plug
the capture system in for you and we'll
explore what the sire can do
after an initial setup screen that asks
you some very basic questions like if
you're in the pal or NTSC region the
device fires up and my games are
displayed in a nice simple menu
I say games it's really just showing all
the folders in the root of my fat32 or
exFAT formatted SD card and subfolders
aren't supported so you can organize in
that way but it does put them in
alphabetical order system console in the
list isn't a game it's just a folder
with the Windows tool that I happen to
have on the SD card select a game and
you get a placeholder image where you
can put your own box out which is a nice
touch and you can see more details about
the game such as the region if it's a
multi disc game and some other
information which we'll come on to
shortly so let's launch this game as we
have it selected this is Spyro the co
emulates the cd-rom coprocessor and
flushes away there as the virtual CD is
accessed it's doing this at 352
kilobytes per second all the dual speed
of the original cd-rom on the system so
there's no speed increase there but of
course there are no seek times and
there's no delay in spin in the CD up so
the whole thing does make for a quicker
experience the parallel port on the
PlayStation 1 can handle up to 3
megabytes per second to the system bus
so it's well within its capabilities to
be running in this way and there is
Spyro running just fine out of the
official 2435 software titles for the
system Cyberdyne quote a 99.8%
compatibility rate I have come across
one small issue myself and I'll show you
that in a moment
but I'm busy playing spyro right now mum
I can't come for dinner
names like Castlevania Symphony of the
night run flawlessly with its beautiful
symphonic music and it's these 2d games
which I really want to enjoy on the ps1
if I'm honest first-gen 3d console games
really don't hold up well on the whole
unless they're cleverly stylized you get
a lot of muddy textures and short draw
distances but the 2d library is a
goldmine for me among my favorites are
the castlevanias heart of darkness
Raiden DX Rayman and of course odd world
and there are also those great 2.5 D
games like Strider - they're all still
immensely playable and they look
fantastic
[Music]
it wasn't all smooth sailing though I
hit my first problem when it came to
Ridge the game runs fine but as the race
starts the thumping soundtrack is
extremely noticeable in his absence this
is because the game would stream Redbook
audio from the CD that's regular audio
tracks just like a normal music CD
to fix this we need to use the system
console tool and use the multiple binary
image merge option in the menu here this
will pull all of the bin files as one
for each audio track it will merge them
into one file and it will add a file
with a cu2 extension a quick look at the
Cu 2 file shows the details of all the
music tracks are now in there and the co
uses that to make the magic happen let's
try a race now and we'll see what
happens
[Applause]
[Music]
that's more like it the same system tool
can be used to tell the sigh oh that a
game has multiple CDs and to swap the CD
during gameplay you just pop the SD card
out and back in and it does the rest so
that tool is really useful for making
all of these things work and you'll want
to invest a little bit of time tidying
up your PlayStation game library to work
correctly with the CEO in this way
trying out the G con 45 also works great
the Scio menu detects and supports a
navigation with lightgun cedar you need
to plug a dry pad in to launch a game if
that's your bag but I did hit another
issue here and that's when I went to
launch point blank all I got was a blank
screen this though showed the maturity
of the product because to get it working
I just needed to dip into the extensive
knowledge base on the side dine website
where any game issues are listed along
with a fix or the progress of work on
effects in the case of point blank I
just needed to change an option here as
instructed and then it launched just
fine
[Music]
diving deeper into the options on this
device then let's have a quick flick
through some of them we can change the
video mode from power to ntsc if you're
using a pal CRT like me you'll need an
RGB AV cable
otherwise you'll be sending the wrong
color frequency to the display and I've
just get a black and white image but
that's just how it is that's not a
sighting that's how pal and NTSC works
it's the same on a regular PlayStation
we can turn menu clicks and clunks on
and off we can select the PSone splash
screen whether it's the one I'm familiar
with or the Japanese one or you can skip
that screen altogether by enabling
fastboot mode
other options include menu music traces
a burnin timer so as not to damage your
CRT if you leave it on a choice of
colors for the menu bar Japanese
navigation which swaps a couple of the
pad buttons around and so on and so on
the more interesting options though are
the mc6 8h c 705 license that sets the
string in the cd-rom controller to SCEA
SCEE or SCE i signify in different
regions some games like Dino crisis
check for this string to run and then
execution mode lets you choose between
various methods of executing the titles
mid boot mode reboots the PlayStation
skips the startup procedure and uses the
BIOS to execute the game directly while
lode exec loads the executable into RAM
and jumps to it while preserving some
elements in memory and registers
basically between mid boot and the for
load exec modes which are set using the
ext DSP mode option in the menu you can
find a set in there to make your game
run if it's causing trouble just like we
did in point blank so if you've run into
problems have a play with these or hit
the knowledgebase and it will likely
tell you to change one I'll save our
changes and now that we don't have fast
boot on I can reset and we can enjoy the
splash screen
[Music]
perhaps the greatest boot up screen on
any console ever in my opinion and that
is how they've snuck the CEO in as part
of that screen text now all of this
trickery is achieved by a chip in the
side that we've seen on the channel
before at the heart of the SIA is the
old terrace cyclone 3 FPGA chip we've
seen it on such devices as the vampire
in amiga accelerators and the mr. FPGA
projects and it would appear that in the
right hands there really is nothing that
this chip can't do is an exciting time
for retro gamers so what we learn today
them this device really does show the
maturity of a product that's been in ten
years of development from the early days
when it shipped in a repurposed action
replay cartridge to the lovely injection
molded case that it has today and the
packaging that just looks like it could
have come straight out of a Sony Factory
at 149 Australian dollars 80 UK pounds
or 104 US dollars and of course it
really should look and operate well and
it does the price brings you a great way
to enjoy convenience without
compromising on authenticity and I think
it really is a must have for any
hardcore PlayStation gamer or indeed a
developer because there's nothing to
stop you from using homebrew titles on
the SD card or plug in a USB cable
directly in from a Windows PC and squirt
it in your programs town into it yes it
would be nice if it was a plug-and-play
solution like the new CC rom device
that's coming for the Gamecube but it
really shouldn't be too hard to find
someone who can help you to install that
switchboard or worst case scenario you
can send your PlayStation off to side
dying systems to get it done for you all
links to the product tools that you've
seen and anything else that we've
chatted about today is in the video
description
I hope you've enjoyed looking at the
Scioto day I really have enjoyed using
it and I think I'll spend the rest of
the day cleaning up this really grubby
PlayStation to make it look as good as
new and it will take pride of place
I will enjoy taking this out and showing
it in combination with the sow when
friends come to visit the cave it really
is a great combination so until next
time I hope you've enjoyed today's video
take care if you enjoy my content and
would like to support the cave while
receiving a completely at free
experience and access to releases one
week before they go public
then visit patreon.com forward slash
retro man cave and join the official
cave dwellers thank you for your support
[Music]
[Applause]
you
[Music]